h1. Changelog

h2. 0.6.0 - 2020-05-16

* Use @article_format_info()@ and @link_format_info()@ internally (if available).
* Add @var_prefix@.
* Add @raw_vals@ for backwards compatibility but its use is discouraged.
* Add @{smd_usedrow}@ to number only rows you use (thanks, aslsw66).
* Add @<txp:smd_query_info />@ tag for those that prefer the security of a tag over {replacements}.
* Improve security (thanks, Gocom).
* Tag registration.

h2. 0.5.0 - 2010-08-31

* @form@ overrides container.
* Container's else automatically works in @form@s.
* Add @populate@ (thanks, atbradley).
* Fixed PHP 4 compatibility and added @html_id@ and @breakclass@ (thanks, makss).
* SHOW defaults to output mode.

h2. 0.4.1 - 2010-01-17

* Added @hashsize@, @mode@ and @{smd_query_unique_id}@.

h2. 0.4.0 - 2009-12-05

* Add @pagevar@, @{smd_prevpage}@, @{smd_nextpage}@, @{smd_rows_prev}@ and @{smd_rows_next}@.
* Add @<txp:smd_query_if_prev>@ and @<txp:smd_query_if_next>@.
* Remove @pgonly@ as paging can now _only_ be performed in the @pageform@.

h2. 0.3.0 - 2009-12-02

* Add unicode support and @strictfields@ to fix a few bugs (thanks, speeke).
* Add direct pagination support.

h2. 0.2.2 - 2009-10-16

* Add @escape@ attribute (thanks, jakob).
* Add @preparse@ attribute.

h2. 0.2.1 - 2009-03-17

* Add @$_SERVER@ var support.

h2. 0.2.0 - 2008-11-23

* Add @<txp:variable />@ support.
* Enable URL variable support.
* Add @urlfilter@, @urlreplace@, @delim@, @paramdelim@ and @defaults@ attributes.

h2. 0.1.2 - 2008-07-14

* Add @<txp:else>@ support in container (thanks, jakob).
* Add @silent@ and @count@ attributes, and the replacement tags @{smd_rows} {smd_thisrow} {smd_thisindex}@.

h2. 0.1.1 - 2008-05-23

* Allow maths in queries - use html entities in Txp 4.0.6 (thanks, jm).
* Fix WHERE clause to default to 1=1 if none supplied (thanks, jm).
* Add more detailed file and link support.

h2. 0.1.0 - 2008-05-22

* Initial release
